 
Updates to Questions and Answers about the Premium Tax 
Credit 
FS-2025-10, Dec. 2025 
 
Note: These FAQs supersede earlier FAQs that were posted in FS 2024-30 on Sept. 30, 2024. 
This Fact Sheet updates frequently asked questions (FAQs) about the Premium Tax Credit.  
The revisions and additions are as follows: 
• Updates to questions related to the limitations on repayment of excess advance 
payment of the premium tax credit due to the removal of the limitations for tax 
years beginning after Dec. 31, 2025 
• Updates throughout for minor style clarifications and topic/question renumbering 
• Deletion of questions Q32 and Qs 35-49 about certain Premium Tax Credit 
rules that do not apply after tax years 2020 and 2021, renumbered Qs 32 
and 34 
 
These FAQs are being issued to provide general information to taxpayers and tax professionals 
as expeditiously as possible. Accordingly, these FAQs may not address any particular taxpayer’s 
specific facts and circumstances, and they may be updated or modified upon further review.  
Because these FAQs have not been published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin, they will not be 
relied on or used by the IRS to resolve a case. Similarly, if an FAQ turns out to be an inaccurate 
statement of the law as applied to a particular taxpayer’s case, the law will control the taxpayer’s 
tax liability. Nonetheless, a taxpayer who reasonably and in good faith relies on these FAQs will 
not be subject to a penalty that provides a reasonable cause standard for relief, including a 
negligence penalty or other accuracy-related penalty, to the extent that reliance results in an 
underpayment of tax. Any later updates or modifications to these FAQs will be dated to enable 
taxpayers to confirm the date on which any changes to the FAQs were made. Additionally, prior 
versions of these FAQs will be maintained on IRS.gov to ensure that taxpayers, who may have 
relied on a prior version, can locate that version if they later need to do so.  
More information about reliance is available. These FAQs were announced in IR-2025-127. 
Background 
The Premium Tax Credit is a refundable tax credit designed to help eligible individuals and 
families with low or moderate income afford health insurance purchased through the Health 
Insurance Marketplace, also known as the Exchange. 
 
• The basics 
• Eligibility 
• Affordability of employer coverage for employees and for family members of employees 
• Computing the amount 
• Reporting, claiming and reconciling 
The basics 
Q1. What is the Premium Tax Credit? (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
A1. The Premium Tax Credit is a refundable tax credit designed to help eligible individuals and 
families with low or moderate income afford health insurance purchased through the Health  
Insurance Marketplace, also known as the Exchange. The size of your Premium Tax Credit is  
 
 
based on a sliding scale. Those who have a lower income get a larger credit to help cover the 
cost of their insurance. When you enroll in Marketplace insurance, you can choose to have the 
Marketplace compute an estimated credit that is paid to your insurance company to lower what 
you pay for your monthly premiums (called advance payments of the Premium Tax Credit, APTC, 
or advance credit payments). Or, you can choose to get all of the benefit of the credit when you 
file your tax return for the year. If you choose to have advance payments of the Premium Tax 
Credit made on your behalf, you will reconcile the amount paid in advance with the actual credit 
you compute when you file your tax return for the year. Either way, you will complete Form 8962, 
Premium Tax Credit (PTC), and attach it to your tax return for the year. 
The credit is “refundable” because, if the amount of the credit is more than the amount of your tax 
liability, you will receive the difference as a refund. If you owe no tax, you can get the full amount 
of the credit as a refund. However, if advance credit payments were made to your insurance 
company and your actual allowable credit on your return is less than your advance credit 
payments, the difference (called excess advance payment of the PTC), subject to repayment 
caps, will be subtracted from your refund or added to your balance due (except for tax year 2020 
when excess advance payment of the PTC did not affect tax liability). For tax years before 2026 
(other than 2020), if your allowable credit is less than your advance credit payments, a repayment 
cap may limit the amount of the excess advance payment of the PTC that is subtracted from your 
refund or added to your balance due. However, for tax years after 2025, if your allowable credit is 
less than your advance credit payments, there is no repayment cap and the total difference will be 
subtracted from your refund or added to your balance due (see Q31). 
 
Q2. What is the Health Insurance Marketplace? 
 
A2. The Health Insurance Marketplace, also called simply the Marketplace, is the place where you will 
find information about private health insurance options, purchase health insurance, and obtain help with 
premiums and out-of-pocket costs if you are eligible. The Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS) administers the requirements for the Marketplace and the health plans offered. Generally, you 
purchase health insurance at the Marketplace during an open enrollment period. After an open enrollment 
period is over, individuals who experience certain life events may qualify for a special enrollment period to 
buy a health plan through a Marketplace. For details about who is eligible for a special enrollment period, 
for information about future open enrollment periods, and to learn more about the Marketplace,  
visit HealthCare.gov. 
 
Q3. How do I get advance payments of the Premium Tax Credit? (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
 
A3. When you or a family member applies for Marketplace coverage, the Marketplace will estimate the 
amount of the Premium Tax Credit you may be able to claim for the tax year, using information you 
provide about your family composition, projected household income, and other factors, such as whether 
those whom you are enrolling are eligible for other, non-Marketplace coverage. Based upon that estimate, 
you can decide if you want to have all, some, or none of your estimated credit paid in advance directly to 
your insurance company to lower your monthly premiums. If you choose to have advance credit  
payments made on your behalf, you will be required to file Form 8962 with your income tax return to 
reconcile the amount of advance credit payments with the Premium Tax Credit you may claim based on 
your actual household income and family size. 
 
If you do not opt for advance credit payments or the Marketplace determines that you were not eligible for 
advance credit payments at the time of enrollment, you should determine if you are eligible to claim the 
credit because your circumstances changed during the year. To claim the credit, you must file Form 8962 
when you file your tax return for the year, which will lower the amount of your taxes owed on that return or 
increase your refund. 
 
 
 
Q4. What happens if my income, family size or other circumstances changes during the year? 
(updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
 
A4. The actual Premium Tax Credit for the year will differ from the advance credit payment amount 
estimated by the Marketplace if your family size or household income as estimated at the time of 
enrollment is different from the family size or household income you report on your return. The more your 
family size or household income differs from the Marketplace estimates used to compute your advance 
credit payments, the more significant the difference will be between your advance credit payments and 
your actual credit. Other changes in circumstances, such as marriage or divorce, may also affect your 
credit amount. If your actual allowable credit on your return is less than your advance credit payments, 
the difference, subject to repayment caps, will be subtracted from your refund or added to your balance 
due for the tax year of Marketplace coverage. For tax years before 2026 (except for tax year 2020 when 
excess advance payment of the PTC did not affect tax liability), if your advance credit payments were 
more than your actual allowable credit, a repayment cap may limit the amount of the excess advance 
payment of the Premium Tax Credit that you must repay. If your actual allowable credit is more than your 
advance credit payments, the difference will be added to your refund or subtracted from your balance 
due. 
Notifying the Marketplace about changes in circumstances as soon as they occur will allow the 
Marketplace to update the information used to determine your expected amount of the Premium Tax 
Credit and adjust your advance credit payment amount. This adjustment will decrease the likelihood of a 
significant difference between your advance credit payments and your actual Premium Tax Credit.  
Changes in circumstances that can affect the amount of your actual Premium Tax Credit include: 
• Increases or decreases in your household income. Events that could result in a significant 
increase to household income include: 
o Lump sum payments of Social Security benefits, including Social Security Disability 
Insurance 
o Lump sum taxable distributions from an individual retirement account or other retirement 
arrangement 
o Realizing capital gains, including sales of stocks, bonds, or cryptocurrency 
o Debt forgiveness or cancellation, such as the cancellation of credit card debt. 
• Marriage 
• Divorce 
• Birth or adoption of a child 
• Other changes to whom you claim as dependents 
• Gaining or losing eligibility for government sponsored or employer sponsored health care 
coverage 
• Moving to another address 
 
Eligibility 
Q5. Who is eligible for the Premium Tax Credit? (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
 
A5. You are eligible for the Premium Tax Credit if you meet all of the following requirements: 
• Have household income that meets certain requirements (see Q7); 
• Do not file a Married Filing Separately tax return (unless you qualify for a special rule that allows 
certain victims of domestic abuse and spousal abandonment to claim the Premium Tax Credit using 
the Married Filing Separately filing status (see Q9 and Q10); 
• Cannot be claimed as a dependent by another person; and 
• For at least 1 month in the year all of the following requirements are met: 
 
 
o You or another family member were enrolled in coverage (excluding "catastrophic" 
coverage) through a Marketplace; 
o The individual enrolled was not able to get affordable coverage through an eligible 
employer-sponsored plan that provides minimum value (see Q11-15); 
o The individual enrolled was not eligible for coverage through a government program, like 
Medicaid, Medicare, CHIP or TRICARE; and 
o The share of premiums for the month not covered by advance credit payments was paid, or 
special circumstances applied that allowed you to stay covered despite all of your premiums 
not having been paid. See instructions for Form 8962 for more information.  
 
Q6. Who is a family member for purposes of the Premium Tax Credit? 
 
A6. For purposes of the Premium Tax Credit, your “family” consists of yourself, your spouse if filing jointly, 
and all other individuals whom you claim as dependents. Your “family size” is the number of individuals in 
your “family.” 
Q7. What are the income limits? (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
 
A7. In general, individuals and families may be eligible for the Premium Tax Credit if their household 
income for the year is at least 100 percent but no more than 400 percent of the federal poverty line for 
their family size. 
For tax years 2021 through 2025, Congress temporarily expanded eligibility for the Premium Tax Credit  
by eliminating the requirement that a taxpayer’s household income may not be more than 400 percent of 
the federal poverty line. Under this rule, taxpayers with household income of more than 400 percent of the 
federal poverty line for their family size may be allowed to claim a Premium Tax Credit, if otherwise 
eligible (see Q5). 
 
Note: The federal poverty guidelines — sometimes referred to as the “federal poverty line” or FPL — 
state an income amount considered poverty level for the year based on family size. The Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) determines the federal poverty guideline amounts annually. The 
government generally adjusts the income limits annually for inflation. The Federal Register publishes a 
chart reflecting these amounts at the beginning of each calendar year. HHS provides three federal  
poverty guidelines: one for residents of the 48 contiguous states and D.C., one for Alaska residents and 
one for Hawaii residents. For purposes of the Premium Tax Credit, eligibility for a certain year is based on 
the most recently published set of federal poverty guidelines on the first day of the annual open 
enrollment period. For example, the tax credit for 2025 is based on the 2024 FPL. See the instructions for  
Form 8962 for more information, including the FPL charts. 
 
Q8. What is household income? (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
 
A8. For purposes of the Premium Tax Credit, your household income is your modified adjusted gross 
income for the year plus that of every other member of your family (see Q6) who is required to file a 
federal income tax return. Modified adjusted gross income is the adjusted gross income on your federal 
income tax return plus any excluded foreign income, nontaxable Social Security benefits (including tier 1 
railroad retirement benefits), and tax-exempt interest received or accrued during the taxable year. It does 
not include Supplemental Security Income (SSI). 
 
If the source of your income is within Puerto Rico or was effectively connected with the conduct of a trade 
or business within Puerto Rico, the income is not included in your modified adjusted gross income and is 
not used in determining your household income. This limitation is specific to the computation of modified 
adjusted gross income for purposes of the Premium Tax Credit. For additional information see Publication 
570. 
 
 
 
Q9. Am I definitely ineligible for the Premium Tax Credit if I’m married but I file my tax return using 
the filing status married filing separately? (updated Feb. 9, 2024) 
 
A9. No. If you are married and you file your tax return using the filing status married filing separately, you 
may be eligible for the Premium Tax Credit if you meet the criteria in section 1.36B-2(b)(2) of the Income  
Tax Regulations, which allows certain victims of domestic abuse and spousal abandonment to claim the 
Premium Tax Credit using the married filing separately filing status. You can claim this relief from the joint 
filing requirement if you meet all of the following criteria: 
• You are living apart from your spouse at the time you file your tax return. 
• You are unable to file a joint return because you are a victim of domestic abuse or spousal 
abandonment (see Q10). 
• You certify on your return that you are a victim of domestic abuse or spousal abandonment. 
To certify that you are a victim of domestic abuse or spousal abandonment and qualify for relief from the 
joint return filing requirement, you should check the box at the top of Form 8962, Premium Tax Credit  
(PTC), which you will use to claim the credit. You should not attach documentation of the abuse or 
abandonment to your tax return but should keep any documentation you may have with your tax return 
records. For examples of what documentation to keep, see Publication 974, Premium Tax Credit (PTC) . 
Taxpayers may claim this relief from the joint filing requirement for no more than three consecutive years. 
For more information on this relief, see the instructions to Form 8962, Premium Tax Credit (PTC).  
Note: Generally, a married taxpayer who lives apart from his or her spouse for the last six months of the 
taxable year is considered unmarried if he or she files a separate return, maintains as the taxpayer’s 
home a household that is also the main home of a dependent child for more than half the year, and 
furnishes over half the cost of the household during the taxable year. 
 
Q10. For purposes of the relief from the joint filing requirement for certain victims of domestic 
abuse and spousal abandonment, how are domestic abuse and spousal abandonment defined? 
 
A10. Domestic abuse includes physical, psychological, sexual, or emotional abuse, including efforts to 
control, isolate, humiliate, and intimidate, or to undermine the victim’s ability to reason independently. All 
the facts and circumstances are considered in determining whether an individual is abused, including the 
effects of alcohol or drug abuse by the victim’s spouse. Depending on the facts and circumstances, abuse 
of the victim’s child or other family member living in the household may constitute abuse of the victim. 
A taxpayer is a victim of spousal abandonment for a taxable year if, taking into account all facts and 
circumstances, the taxpayer is unable to locate his or her spouse after reasonable diligence. 
Affordability of employer coverage for employees and for family members of 
employees 
Q11. How do I know if the coverage offered by my employer is affordable? (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
 
A11. If you are an employee and your employer offers coverage to you (sometimes called “an employer - 
sponsored plan”) that coverage generally is affordable for you if the portion of the annual premium you 
must pay for self-only coverage that satisfies the minimum value requirement (see Q15) does not exceed 
9.5 percent of your household income, but this percentage is adjusted annually. For plan years beginning 
in: 
• 2015, the percentage is 9.56 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2014-37 
• 2016, the percentage is 9.66 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2014-62 
• 2017, the percentage is 9.69 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2016-24 
 
• 2018, the percentage is 9.56 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2017-36 
• 2019, the percentage is 9.86 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2018-34 
• 2020, the percentage is 9.78 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2019-29 
• 2021, the percentage is 9.83 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2020-36 
• 2022, the percentage is 9.61 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2021-36 
• 2023, the percentage is 9.12 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2022-34 
• 2024, the percentage is 8.39 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2023-29 
• 2025, the percentage is 9.02 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2024-35 
• 2026, the percentage is 9.96 percent – see Revenue Procedure 2025-25  
(See Q8 for what is included in household income.) 
 
If the employer offers multiple health coverage options, the affordability test applies to the lowest -cost 
option available to you that also satisfies the minimum value requirement. If your employer offers any 
wellness programs (including programs based on a health factor or requiring that the wellness incentive 
be earned), the affordability test is based on the premium you would pay if you received the maximum 
discount for any tobacco cessation programs and did not receive any other discounts based on wellness 
programs. 
 
Q12. How do I know if the coverage offered to me by an employer of someone else, such as my 
spouse’s or parent’s employer, is affordable for me? (added Feb. 9, 2024)  
A12. If you are an individual who may enroll in coverage offered by an employer because you are a family 
member of an employee whose employer offers the coverage (see Q6 for who is a family member of the 
employee), that coverage generally is affordable for you if the portion of the annual premium the 
employee must pay for family coverage that satisfies the minimum value requirement  
(see Q15) does not exceed a percentage of the employee’s household income. The percentage you use 
to determine the affordability of the family coverage is the same percentage the employee uses in Q11 to 
determine if the coverage is affordable to the employee. The family coverage premium amount you use 
to determine affordability is the amount the employee must pay to cover the employee and all family 
members of the employee who are offered coverage that also satisfies the minimum value requirement. 
If the employer offers multiple health coverage options, the affordability test applies to the lowest -cost 
option available that (1) covers the employee and all family members of the employee who are offered the 
coverage and (2) satisfies the minimum value requirement. If the employer offers any wellness programs 
(including programs based on a health factor or requiring that the wellness incentive be earned), the 
affordability test is based on the premium the employee would pay if the employee received the maximum 
discount for any tobacco cessation programs and did not receive any other discounts based on wellness 
programs. 
 
If you are an individual who may enroll in coverage offered by someone else’s employer, but you are not 
a family member of the employee offered the coverage (for example, you are an adult non- dependent 
child of the employee), that coverage is affordable for you only if you enroll in it.  
Q13. What if I receive an offer of coverage from multiple employers? (added Feb. 9, 2024) 
 
A13. If you receive offers of coverage from multiple employers, whether the coverage is offered by your 
employer or someone else’s employer, you are generally considered to have an offer of affordable 
coverage if at least one of the offers of coverage is affordable for you. 
Q14. How is the affordability of employer coverage affected if the Marketplace makes a 
determination that the employer coverage is unaffordable? (added Feb. 9, 2024) 
 
 
 
A14. The regulations under Internal Revenue Code section 36B provide a safe harbor for certain 
affordability determinations made by the Marketplace. Under the safe harbor, employer -sponsored 
coverage is treated as unaffordable for an individual if, when the individual enrolled in Marketplace 
coverage, (1) the individual (or someone else on the individual’s behalf) provided accurate information to 
the Marketplace about the cost of employer-sponsored coverage for the individual (and other family 
members, if applicable) and (2) the Marketplace determined that advance payments of the Premium Tax 
Credit (APTC) could be made for the individual’s Marketplace coverage because the employer-sponsored 
coverage was unaffordable based on projected household income. Under these circumstances, a 
Premium Tax Credit would still be allowed for the individual’s Marketplace coverage if the other eligibility 
criteria are met, even though the employer-sponsored coverage would have been affordable based on 
actual household income. The safe harbor does not apply to you if, with reckless disregard for the facts, 
incorrect information was provided to the Marketplace concerning the portion of the annual premium for 
your coverage under the plan. 
 
Q15. How do individuals know if the employer coverage offered to them provides minimum value? 
(updated Feb. 9, 2024) 
A15. An eligible employer-sponsored plan provides minimum value if the plan covers at least 60 percent 
of the expected total allowed costs for covered services. The plan also must provide substantial coverage 
of in-patient hospitalization and physician services. Your employer is required to provide you with a 
document called a Summary of Benefits and Coverage. That document will give you information about 
the benefits and coverage under your employer-sponsored plan, including whether the plan provides 
minimum value. Also, under the Fair Labor Standards Act, most employers will  provide employees with a 
one-time notice about their options in the Marketplace and their potential eligibility for a Premium Tax 
Credit. This one-time notice will include information about whether the employer has a plan that provides 
minimum value. 
Q16. Employer X offers affordable, minimum value coverage to X’s employees. X has stated, 
however, that if employee attempts to enroll in the employer-sponsored coverage, X will terminate 
employee’s employment. Is employee considered eligible for X’s employer-sponsored coverage 
and, consequently, ineligible for a Premium Tax Credit? 
 
A16. No. The regulations under Internal Revenue Code section 36B provide that an individual is not 
considered eligible for employer-sponsored coverage unless the individual may enroll in the coverage. 
Employee cannot enroll in X’s employer-sponsored coverage unless employee is an employee of X, and 
X will terminate employee’s employment if employee attempts to enroll in X’s coverage. Consequently, 
employee cannot enroll in X’s coverage and is not considered eligible for X’s employer -sponsored 
coverage. Employee will be allowed a Premium Tax Credit if employee meets the other eligibility 
requirements for the credit. 
 
Q17. Spouse is married to employee. Employee’s employer, Y, offers affordable, minimum value 
coverage to Y’s employees and their family members. Y has stated, however, that if employee 
attempts to enroll spouse in the employer-sponsored coverage, Y will terminate employee’s 
employment. Is spouse considered eligible for Y’s employer-sponsored coverage and, 
consequently, ineligible for a Premium Tax Credit? 
 
A17. No. The regulations under Internal Revenue Code section 36B provide that an individual is not 
considered eligible for employer-sponsored coverage unless the individual may enroll in the coverage. 
Spouse cannot be enrolled in Y’s employer-sponsored coverage unless employee is an employee of Y, 
and Y will terminate employee’s employment if employee attempts to enroll spouse in Y’s coverage.  
Consequently, spouse cannot be enrolled in Y’s coverage and is not considered eligible for Y’s employer- 
sponsored coverage. Spouse will be allowed a Premium Tax Credit if spouse meets the other eligibility  
 
 
requirements for the credit. 
 
Q18. Employee is married to spouse, and they have one child (dependent). Employee’s employer, 
Y, offers coverage to its employees and their family members, and the coverage provides 
minimum value and is affordable for employee, spouse and dependent. Y’s plan permits spouses 
and dependents to enroll in the employer-sponsored coverage only if the employee enrolls in the 
coverage. Employee chooses not to enroll in Y’s employer-sponsored coverage, and, as a result, 
spouse and dependent are not permitted to enroll in Y’s coverage under the rules of Y’s plan. If 
the spouse or dependent enrolls in Marketplace coverage, are they eligible for a Premium Tax 
Credit? (updated Feb. 9, 2024) 
A18. No. Spouse and dependent are not eligible for a Premium Tax Credit for their Marketplace 
coverage. The regulations under Internal Revenue Code section 36B provide that an employee who may 
enroll in an eligible employer-sponsored plan and a family member of the employee who may enroll in the 
plan are eligible for minimum essential coverage under the employer-sponsored plan if the plan is 
affordable and provides minimum value. Additionally, an employee and a family member are not eligible 
for a Premium Tax Credit for their Marketplace coverage if they could have enrolled in employer -
sponsored coverage that is affordable and provides minimum value. Because all three family members 
could have enrolled in Y’s employer-sponsored coverage through employee’s enrollment, and the 
coverage was affordable and provided minimum value, they are not eligible for a Premium Tax Credit for 
their Marketplace coverage. 
 
Q19. Am I eligible for the Premium Tax Credit if I enroll in coverage through an employer and also 
enroll in coverage through the Marketplace? 
A19. If you enroll in an employer-sponsored plan, including retiree coverage, that is minimum essential 
coverage, you are not eligible for the Premium Tax Credit for your Marketplace coverage even if the 
employer plan is unaffordable or fails to provide minimum value. You may be eligible for a Premium Tax 
Credit for coverage of another member of your family who enrolls in Marketplace coverage and is not 
enrolled in the employer plan. 
 
Q20. Can I get the Premium Tax Credit for coverage through a Marketplace if I am eligible for 
coverage through my former employer, such as COBRA or retiree coverage?  
A20. If your coverage is from a former employer, such as COBRA  or retiree coverage, you can decline 
the employer coverage, even if it is affordable and provides minimum value, and may be eligible for the 
Premium Tax Credit for your Marketplace coverage. 
 
Q21. What if the retiree coverage consists of a retiree-only health reimbursement arrangement 
(HRA)? 
A21. If your former employer offers you a retiree-only HRA, you cannot claim a Premium Tax Credit if you 
do not opt-out of receiving reimbursements under the HRA. 
 
Q22. Am I allowed a Premium Tax Credit for Marketplace coverage if my employer offers me an 
Individual Coverage Health Reimbursement Arrangement (ICHRA)? (added Feb. 9, 2024) 
A22. If your employer offered you an ICHRA, you are not allowed a Premium Tax Credit for Marketplace 
coverage unless 1) the ICHRA is considered unaffordable and 2) you opt-out of receiving reimbursements 
under the ICHRA and enroll in Marketplace coverage. Section 1.36B-2(c)(5) of the Income Tax 
Regulations provides rules for when an ICHRA is considered affordable. 
Computing the amount 
 
 
 
Q23. Am I allowed a Premium Tax Credit if my employer provides me with a qualified small 
employer health reimbursement arrangement (QSEHRA) for one or more months of the year? 
 
A23. If you enroll in Marketplace coverage and are provided a QSEHRA that constitutes affordable 
coverage, you are not allowed a Premium Tax Credit for your Marketplace coverage for the months the 
QSEHRA constitutes affordable coverage. If the QSEHRA does not constitute affordable coverage and 
you are allowed a Premium Tax Credit for a month you are provided the QSEHRA, you must reduce your 
PTC for the month by the monthly permitted benefit provided to you under the QSEHRA. Notice 2017-67, 
questions 65-71, provides more information on how to determine if a QSEHRA is affordable and how to 
compute your Premium Tax Credit if the QSEHRA is unaffordable. 
Q24. How is the amount of the Premium Tax Credit computed (updated Dec. 23, 2025)? 
 
A24. The amount of the Premium Tax Credit is generally equal to the premium for the second lowest 
cost silver plan available through the Marketplace that applies to the members of your coverage family, 
minus a certain percentage of your household income. However, the credit cannot be more than the 
premiums for the Marketplace plan or plans in which you or your family enroll (called your enrollment 
premiums). 
Your coverage family consists of the members of your family who are enrolled in coverage through the 
Marketplace and ineligible for non-Marketplace coverage such as Medicare, Medicaid or affordable 
employer-sponsored coverage that provides minimum value. However, a family member is part of your 
coverage family for a month only if the share of premiums for the month not covered by advance credit 
payments was paid, or special circumstances applied that allowed the family member to stay covered 
despite all of the premiums not having been paid. See instructions for Form 8962 for more information. 
(See Q6 for information on who is in your family.) 
 
Q25. What is the second lowest cost silver plan if only one silver plan is available where I reside, 
or the premiums for the two lowest cost silver plans are exactly the same?  
A25. If there is only one silver plan, that plan is treated as the second lowest cost silver plan. If the two 
lowest cost silver plans have identical premiums, that premium is the premium for the second lowest cost 
silver plan. 
 
Q26. I am a smoker. Is the amount of my Premium Tax Credit based on the higher premiums for 
smokers? 
 
A26. Higher premiums for smokers are not counted in determining the amount of the second lowest cost 
silver plan that applies to your family. Therefore, if the monthly premium for the applicable second lowest 
cost silver plan is $1,200 for smokers and $900 for non-smokers, the $900 non-smoker premium is the 
second lowest cost silver plan premium used to compute your credit. However, the amount of your 
enrollment premiums, which might limit the amount of your Premium Tax Credit, is the amount you are 
actually being charged. For example, if your monthly enrollment premiums are $650 because you are a 
tobacco user but would be $500 if you did not use tobacco, the monthly enrollment premiums you use in 
computing your Premium Tax Credit are $650. 
 
Q27. Am I eligible for the Premium Tax Credit for my coverage if I enroll in the middle of the month? 
 
A27. To be eligible for a credit amount for a particular month, you generally must be enrolled in a qualified 
health plan through the Marketplace on the first day of that month. However, if an individual enrolls in a 
qualified health plan and the enrollment is effective on the date of the individual’s birth, adoption, or 
placement for adoption or in foster care, or on the effective date of a court order, the individual is treated 
as enrolled as of the first day of that month. 
 
Reporting, claiming and reconciling 
Q28. Will I have to file a federal income tax return and attach Form 8962 to get the Premium Tax 
Credit (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
 
A28. Yes. If you have APTC in any amount, you must file a Form 8962, and attach it to your federal 
income tax return for that year. You will use Form 8962 to reconcile the difference between the APTC 
made on your behalf and the actual amount of the credit you may claim on your return. This filing 
requirement applies whether or not you would otherwise be required to file a return. 
 
If APTC is paid on behalf of you or an individual in your family, and you do not file a tax return, you will 
not be eligible for APTC to help pay for your Marketplace health insurance coverage in future years. This 
means that you will be responsible for the full cost of your monthly premiums.  
To claim a Premium Tax Credit for any tax year in which no APTC was paid on your behalf, you must file 
a Form 8962 and attach it to your federal income tax return for the year you claim the Premium Tax 
Credit. Also, if APTC is paid on your behalf but your Premium Tax Credit is more than the APTC, you 
have net PTC. To claim a net PTC, you must file a Form 8962 and attach it to your federal income tax 
return for the year. Claiming a net PTC will lower the amount of tax you owe or increase your refund to 
the extent it is more than the amount of tax you owe. 
 
Q29. If I get insurance through the Marketplace, how will I know if I need to file a federal tax return 
and what to report on my return? (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
A29. If you purchased coverage through the Marketplace you should receive Form 1095- A, Health  
Insurance Marketplace Statement from your Marketplace by early February. If this form shows advance 
credit payments were paid on your behalf or on behalf of another member of your family, you are required 
to complete Form 8962, Premium Tax Credit (PTC), to reconcile those advance credit payments. Form 
1095-A provides information you will need when completing Form 8962. 
If you have questions about the information on Form 1095-A, or about receiving Form 1095-A, you should 
contact your Marketplace directly. Although the IRS will not be able to answer questions about the 
information on your Form 1095-A or about missing or lost forms, taxpayers may be able to view and 
download Form 1095-A by creating an individual IRS Online Account at IRS.gov. 
Filing electronically is the easiest way to file a complete and accurate tax return. Free electronic filing 
options are available through the IRS’s Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) and Tax Counseling for  
the Elderly (TCE) programs, and the IRS Free File program. 
 
Q30. How do I reconcile advance credit payments with the actual Premium Tax Credit on 
my return? (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
A30. When you complete your tax return, you will figure your credit and compare it to the amount of your 
advance credit payments on Form 8962. If your actual allowable credit on your return is less than your 
advance credit payments, the difference (called excess advance payment of the Premium Tax Credit), 
subject to certain repayment caps, will be subtracted from your refund or added to your balance due. For 
tax years before 2026 (except for tax year 2020 when excess advance payment of the Premium Tax 
Credit did not affect tax liability), if your advance credit payments for a year were more than your actual 
allowable credit for the year, a repayment cap may limit the amount of the excess advance payment of 
the Premium Tax Credit you must repay. If your actual allowable credit is more than your advance credit 
payments, the difference will be added to your refund or subtracted from your balance due. (See Q4  for 
information on changes in circumstances). 
 
 
 
Q31. What are the repayment caps? (updated Dec. 23, 2025) 
 
A31. For tax years before 2026 (except for 2020 when excess advance payment of the Premium Tax 
Credit did not affect tax liability), if your advance credit payments for a year were more than your actual 
allowable credit for the year, a repayment cap may limit the amount of the excess advance payment of 
the Premium Tax Credit that you must repay. Your applicable repayment cap is based on your household 
income and filing status for the year and applies only if the household income you reported on your tax 
return is less than 400 percent of the FPL. There is no repayment cap for tax years after 2025. For tax 
years after 2025, you must repay the full amount by which your advance credit payments exceed your 
Premium Tax Credit. This amount is added to your total tax liability, which will reduce your refund or 
increase your balance due. See Publication 974 for more information on the repayment caps. 
Q32. What happens if I have a balance due from an excess advance payment of the Premium Tax 
Credit, but I cannot afford to make the payment when filing my tax return?  
A32. Many individuals who need to repay excess advance payments of the Premium Tax Credit will 
satisfy that balance through a reduction in their expected income tax refund. However, if you owe a 
balance in excess of your refund, you should be aware that the IRS routinely works with taxpayers who 
owe amounts they cannot afford to pay. The ability to make a payment arrangement for these 
underpayments is identical to the provisions for other tax balances. See Publication 4849, Can’t Pay the 
Tax You  
Owe? for further information on how to pay your past due federal income tax liability. 
Q33. I enrolled in a qualified health plan with advance credit payments based on a Marketplace 
determination or assessment that I was ineligible for Medicaid or CHIP coverage. Subsequently, I 
was determined eligible for Medicaid and was enrolled for several months while I was enrolled in 
the qualified health plan. Am I treated as eligible for Medicaid and therefore ineligible for the 
Premium Tax Credit for these months? 
 
A33. Generally, no. If a Marketplace makes a determination or assessment that an individual is ineligible 
for Medicaid or CHIP and eligible for advance credit payments when the individual enrolls in a qualified 
health plan, the individual is treated as not eligible for Medicaid or CHIP for purposes of the Premium Tax 
Credit for the duration of the period of coverage under the qualified health plan (generally, the rest of the 
plan year). Accordingly, if you were enrolled in both Medicaid coverage and in a qualified health plan for 
which advance credit payments were made for one or more months of the year following a Marketplace 
determination or assessment that you were ineligible for Medicaid, you can claim the Premium Tax Credit 
for these months, if you are otherwise eligible. The Marketplace may periodically check state Medicaid 
data to identify consumers who may be dual-enrolled and direct them to return to the Marketplace to 
discontinue their advance credit payments. If you believe that you may currently be enrolled in both 
Medicaid and a qualified health plan with advance credit payments, you should contact the Marketplace 
immediately. 
 
IRS-FAQ 